docs: Getting started + React (#506)
emdgroup-liquid/liquid: src/docs/pages/introduction/getting-started/react.md

---
eleventyNavigation:
  key: React
  parent: Getting started
  order: 1
layout: layout.njk
title: React
permalink: introduction/getting-started/react/
---

# React

> Liquid Oxygen provides React Bindings for all web components. Although the rendered components are still web components, the bindings improve the developer experience by providing a more familiar API and a better integration with React.

Author: Are you sure about the capital Web Components?

On this page, you'll find detailed instructions on how to integrate Liquid Oxygen into your React project and how to use the components.

## Prerequisites

Liquid Oxygen is easy to integrate into an existing React project. We assume you already have a React project set up. If not, you can create a new project with vite.

```sh
npm create vite@latest your-project-name -- --template react-ts
```

For more information about this command and vite, please refer to the [official vite documentation](https://vitejs.dev/guide/#scaffolding-your-first-vite-project).<br />Although this guide assumes your project is using typescript, all examples should also be applicable to javascript projects.

## Install

Add Liquid Oxygen to your project with the package manager of your choice.

```sh
npm install @emdgroup-liquid/liquid
```

> Liquid Oxygen works with any package manager (e.g. npm, yarn or pnpm). For simplicity, we continue to use npm for the following guide.

### Import and register web components

> The web components need to be registered before they can be used. Liquid Oxygen provides the `defineCustomElements` function to register all Liquid Oxygen components. The script loads components lazily only when used in your application. This reduces your bundle size and only loads required code at runtime.

Reviewer: This is wrong. The cause is confusing terminology from Stencil's side. The components are defined lazily, not loaded lazily. The `defineCustomElements` method is only a convenience method for not defining each component individually. However, it does not have any effect on the bundle size. Nevertheless, the bundler can still tree shake the code, independently of whether the `defineCustomElements` method has been used or not.

```suggestion
The web components need to be registered before they can be used. Liquid Oxygen provides the `defineCustomElements` function to register all available Web Components. The script defines the components lazily, only when used in your application. 
```

Author: Think we talked about that last week after your comment:
So based on my observation the mechanics are something like this:

1. default dist: the consuming client registers all components with `defineCustomElements`. Once the browser finds the element in the dom it loads the corresponding script.

2. dist-custom-elements: requires the consuming client to import and register elements individually. This happens when importing the component (due to auto register). This shifts loading the required script for the component to the moment the the component got imported and does not wait (lazily) until it's actually rendered in the dom. 

I think we can omit the details and focus on "recommendations".

> Add following code to your `App.tsx` file or any similar file which is loaded for every page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following code to your `App.tsx` file (or any similar file which is loaded for every page).
```

```tsx
// App.tsx
import { defineCustomElements } from '@emdgroup-liquid/liquid/dist/loader'
defineCustomElements()
```

### Import stylesheet

All web components are loaded togehter with their styles embedded. Therefore we only need to import the global stylesheet for Liquid Oxygen.

> Add following code to your `App.tsx` file or any similar file which is loaded for every page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following code to your `App.tsx` file (or any similar file which is loaded for every page).
```

```tsx
// App.tsx
import '@emdgroup-liquid/liquid/dist/css/liquid.global.css'
```

<!-- TODO: Think about if we should mention CSS components here -->

<!-- > If you plan to use Liquid Oxygen [CSS Components](https://liquid.merck.design/liquid/guides/css-vs-web-components/) you should also refer to the [general Getting Started guide](https://liquid.merck.design/liquid/getting-started/). -->

### Component assets

Some components require static assets during runtime. Although the Liquid Oxygen package includes all assets, you have to add these assets to your output bundle. We recommend to include copying these assets in your build process, which ensures that the assets are always up to date.

> You should add the copied assets (e.g. `public/liquid/assets/*`) to your `.gitignore` file.

> For the following example, we assume you are using [vite](https://vitejs.dev/). By default, vite uses the `public` folder for static assets. To include the Liquid Oxygen assets in your output bundle, you can copy them to this folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the following example, we assume you are using [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/). By default, Vite uses the `public` folder for static assets. To include the Liquid Oxygen assets in your output bundle, you can copy them to this folder.
```

First, install the `rollup-plugin-copy` plugin. This plugin allows you to copy files and folders while building.

```sh
npm install rollup-plugin-copy -D
```

> Now include the copy plugin in your vite config. Add the following code to your `vite.config.ts` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now include the copy plugin in your Vite config. Add the following code to your `vite.config.ts` file.
```

```ts
// vite.config.ts
import { defineConfig } from 'vite'
import copy from 'rollup-plugin-copy'

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [
    copy({
      targets: [
        {
          src: 'node_modules/@emdgroup-liquid/liquid/dist/liquid/assets/*',
          dest: 'public/liquid/assets',
        },
      ],
      hook: 'buildStart',
    }),
    // ...other plugins e.g. react()
  ],
  // ...other config options
})
```

You need to "tell" Liquid Oxygen where to find the assets. The components will look for the `__LD_ASSET_PATH__` variable in the `window` object. The path should point to the `liquid/` folder.

Add following code to your `App.tsx` file or any similar file which is loaded for every page.

```tsx
// App.tsx
// if-clause only required in server-side rendering context
if (typeof window !== 'undefined') {
  // @ts-ignore: Property '__LD_ASSET_PATH__' does not exist on type 'Window & typeof globalThis'.ts(2339)
  window.__LD_ASSET_PATH__ = '/liquid/'
}
```

> Once the asset path is set and the assets are availe on runtime, components can automatically load their assets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the asset path is set and the assets are availe on runtime, all components can automatically load their assets.
```

> If this guide does not fit to your environment, please refer to our sandbox apps for more details and other examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this guide does not suit your environment, please refer to our sandbox apps for more details and other examples:
```

- [React & Vite](https://stackblitz.com/github/emdgroup-liquid/liquid-sandbox-react-tailwind?file=vite.config.ts)<br />This sandbox is quite similar to the example above.

> - [React & CRA](https://codesandbox.io/p/github/emdgroup-liquid/liquid-sandbox-cra-tailwind/main?file=%2Fpackage.json)<br />The Sandbox uses Create React App which does not allow to adjust the webpack config. In this case we added a postinstall script to copy the assets to the public folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [React & CRA](https://codesandbox.io/p/github/emdgroup-liquid/liquid-sandbox-cra-tailwind/main?file=%2Fpackage.json)<br />The Sandbox uses Create React App which does not allow to adjust the Webpack config. In this case we added a postinstall script to copy the assets to the public folder.
```

> - [React & Next.js](https://stackblitz.com/github/emdgroup-liquid/liquid-sandbox-next-tailwind?file=next.config.js)<br />Next.js uses webpack under the hood. The sandbox shows how to add a custom webpack config `next.config.js` to copy the assets to the public folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [React & Next.js](https://stackblitz.com/github/emdgroup-liquid/liquid-sandbox-next-tailwind?file=next.config.js)<br />Next.js uses Webpack under the hood. The sandbox shows how to add a custom Webpack config `next.config.js` to copy the assets to the public folder.
```

## Usage

> For use in a react project, make sure to take the react bindings of Liquid Oxygen. All components are imported from `@emdgroup-liquid/liquid/dist/react`. The bindings significantly improve JSX compatibility and your developer experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When adding components from Liquid Oxygen in a React project, make sure you use the React bindings. All components are imported from `@emdgroup-liquid/liquid/dist/react`. The bindings significantly improve `JSX` compatibility and your developer experience.
```

Author: Changed it to:
> When adding Liquid Oxygen components to a React project, it is crucial to use the React bindings. All components are imported from `@emdgroup-liquid/liquid/dist/react`. The bindings significantly improve JSX compatibility and your developer experience.

Ok with that?

Reviewer: Yes 👍

Let's have a look at how to add a [LdButton](https://liquid.merck.design/liquid/components/ld-button/) to your project. This examnple also includes a [LdIcon](https://liquid.merck.design/liquid/components/ld-icon/) as it helps you to check if Liquid Oxygen assets are loaded correctly.

```tsx
import { LdButton, LdIcon } from '@emdgroup-liquid/liquid/dist/react'

export function SampleComponent() {
  return (
    <LdButton>
      Click me!
      <LdIcon name="energy" />
    </LdButton>
  )
}
```

When you put this component on a page, you should see a blue button with the text "Click me!" and a lightning bolt icon.

### Events

> Liquid Oxygen components aim to stick to the native browser components where possible. In most cases, you can expect the same events and behavior of the Liquid Oxygen component and its native equivalent. Custom events are documented on the respective component pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Liquid Oxygen components aim to mimic native HTML elements where possible. In most cases, you can expect the same events and behavior from Liquid Oxygen component and its native equivalent. Custom events are documented on the respective component pages.
```

Author: Changed it to:
> Liquid Oxygen components aim to work similarly to native HTML elements as much as possible. In most cases, you can expect the same events and behavior from a Liquid Oxygen component and its native equivalent. Custom events are documented on the respective component pages.

Ok with that?

Reviewer: Yes 👍

Let's take our button from above and add a click handler.

```tsx
import { LdButton, LdIcon } from '@emdgroup-liquid/liquid/dist/react'

export function SampleComponent() {
  return (
    <LdButton onClick={() => alert('Clicked!')}>
      Click me!
      <LdIcon name="energy" />
    </LdButton>
  )
}
```

> Please notice the camel case notation of the `onClick` prop. This is the expected [React convention](https://reactjs.org/docs/handling-events.html) but differs from the native `onclick` attribute and [documentation](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/ref_eventattributes.asp). As we do not explicitly document these events, you need to apply this convention yourself. Typescript and IntelliSense will aid you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please notice the camel case notation of the `onClick` prop. This is the expected [React convention](https://reactjs.org/docs/handling-events.html) but differs from the native `onclick` attribute and [documentation](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/ref_eventattributes.asp). As we do not explicitly document these events, you need to apply this convention yourself. Typescript and your code editor's IntelliSense will assist you with that.
```

There are a few cases where native events of web components do not behave as expected by React. In these cases, Liquid Oxygen provides custom events prefixed with `ld` and documented on the respective component pages.

> > LdInput `onChange` event invokes when the component loses focus (if the value changed), which is the standard browser behavior but differs from the native React `onChange` event. Use the `onInput` event in cases you want to handle user input immediately while typing.

Reviewer: Maybe we should link to the [event handling guide](https://liquid.merck.design/liquid/guides/event-handling/) here.

Please use the `ld-notice` component instead of the citation markup.

Author: Will add a link to the dedicated guide but will keep the notice in here as react devs will probably ignore the link until they run into this issue and get frustrated. As this is basically a pretty common case I'll keep the short version of it in here. + a link to the longer event handler details
